# Study Strategies

It's hard to study effectively. This is mostly because we've never really
learned how to study the right way, even after years of university in some
cases! In this chapter we will show you some of the most important strategies to
learn in a way that is much more time efficient.

As the HackYourFuture course is very demanding, this is critical to get through
the program successfully. In fact, many successful experts that require focus
and concentration for their craft (programmers, writers, artists, scientists,
craftsmen, etc.) share one thing in common: they are very serious about ​how
​they learn. This chapter will give you a short introduction into how you can
study most effectively.

- [Planning](#planning)
- [Don’t just read, code it!](#Don-t-just-read--code-it)
- [Sleep, Breaks and Exercise](#Sleep--Breaks-and-Exercise)
- [Distractions](#distractions)
- [How to become a pro at learning](#How-to-become-a-pro-at-learning)

## Planning

The first part of studying should be to make a study plan.

Your homework will consist of various components. You will need to:

- read/watch​ a certain amount of information,
- apply ​this knowledge in the homework exercises.

Every week consists of the homework of the previous week and the reading
material for the following week. Before you start doing anything, it’s good to
​plan your week ahead. Divide the large amounts of tasks into small pieces, and
think about how much time you expect spend on each task by having a quick look
at it.

It is advised to watch some parts of the lecture again and practice with the
examples/exercises provided in class. Change the values, variables and other
aspects of the code to improve your understanding of the practical use of these
concepts. In addition to the videos, you can go through the reading material of
the previous week.

We have a certain number of articles and videos that we share as part of the
curriculum. However, it is important to read and watch them effectively. Again,
try to follow the examples and code them yourself. Also, you are free to look
for your own reading material and videos. ​There is a lot of good material on
the internet, which you can make use of. ​Also, if you find a resource that you
think is better than what we offer in the curriculum, please let us know.

## Don’t just read, code it

As explained in the previous section, reading about code, or listening to your
teacher about code,​ is not the same as actually studying code!​ It is
incredibly important that you try out the concepts that you have learned, and
that you try to apply it in multiple ways in order to become comfortable with
it. There is no way around this.

We recommend that when you study something, directly try it out in your code
editor by running the examples and writing your own examples and see how it
works in practice.

Only this way you will truly understand it well, and gain the ability to turn
ideas into code.

One more tip: Write code ​with pen and paper​. Try to write down the basic
concepts including some simple examples. Yes, this can also be done on the
computer, however research shows that writing things down with good
old-fashioned pen and paper provides cognitive benefits that you cannot achieve
when typing on your keyboard. By the way, some companies will ask you to do the
same during their interview process – good practice indeed!

## Group Study

Learning and programming are both less fun alone. Planning group study sessions
will make your time at HYF more fun and more productive.

One great way to work together is _Pair Programming_, this is a technique where
two people code together on a single computer. Take a look through these
references then give it a try with your classmates:

- [Good first read](https://medium.com/@weblab_tech/pair-programming-guide-a76ca43ff389)
- [Thorough guide](https://tuple.app/pair-programming-guide/)
- [Deeper dive](https://martinfowler.com/articles/on-pair-programming.html)
- [How to Pair Program](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YhV4TaZaB84)
- [Things to Avoid](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=McZ131y0OYU)

## Sleep, Breaks and Exercise

Sleep is incredibly important for your brain’s memory capability. If you study a
lot, but don’t sleep enough, part of all the hours you put in are useless. On
average the recommended time of sleep is ​~8 hours​. If you go much below this,
it will most likely decrease your performance as a student.

We recommend that you do not look at any screen the hour before you go to bed,
as this improves your overall sleep quality. Your brain thinks that the light of
your screen is natural light, and this will make you stay awake.

Try to take 10-15 minutes breaks in between studying sessions of 90 minutes, as
this re-energizes you and improves your focus. During these breaks, some form of
physical exercise is highly recommended. Take a walk outside, stretch,
dance...get moving!

More generally, we recommend you eat healthy and do sports. There is a large
body of evidence that shows exercise helps memory and thinking through both
direct and indirect means. Directly through a reduction of insulin resistance,
inflammation, and an increase of chemicals in the brain that affect the health
of brain cells, the growth of blood vessels in the brain, as well as the
survival of new brain cells. Indirectly, exercise improves mood and sleep, and
reduces stress and anxiety.

## Distractions

The goal whilst studying should be to reach a state of ‘flow’. Flow can be
described as the complete immersion in an activity. By doing so, you lose your
sense of space and time. There is quite some research about ‘flow’. This
research shows that not only your learning curve increases significantly, also
the level of joy increases. In other words, if you are fully concentrated whilst
programming you feel way more satisfied as a result.

To reach this level of optimal concentration and create a state of flow,
distractions should be shut out as much as possible. The two most common enemies
are described below.

[Here you can find a presentation](https://github.com/HackYourFutureBelgium/hack-the-talks/blob/master/How_to_increase_focus%26productivity.pdf)
on **'How to increase focus & productivity'** one of our coaches shared with us
during a HackTheTalk, the inspirational talks we organize on Sunday Mornings.

### Challenge number 1: Social Media & Phone

Social media is incredibly bad for your focus and therefore it decreases your
ability to learn complex concepts. In order to understand programming concepts
your brain needs full focus. Every time it is interrupted by a phone or a
message online, your brain has to switch its attention. To go back to your code
after that will cost a lot of energy. In fact, studies have shown that just
having a phone in the same room, reduces your ability to study significantly.

We highly recommend you: when you are studying, put your phone away and use your
study time for studying only.

### Challenge number 2: Children and family

Many of us are not living by ourselves. You might have children, or family
members asking for attention. The challenge here is to try and create a quiet
space, where you will not be interrupted. Of course, this is not always possible
if you are a parent. But perhaps you can ask your partner or a friend to keep an
eye on your children at least for a few hours a day, while you go to a local
library, or study in a quiet room at a friend’s house.

## How to become a pro at learning

Obviously, this chapter only provides you with a very basic introduction. If you
are interested in learning more about how to learn effectively we recommend you
to read more about deliberate learning and deep work. Studying effectively –
although NOT easy- is a superpower you can use for the rest of your life!!! An
excellent read about the value of working without distractions (and how to
achieve it) is the book ​Deep Work​ by Cal Newport.
